[MAINTAINING.md] Maintainer's instructions for releasing qiskit (#14709)
Qiskit/qiskit: MAINTAINING.md

should be pushed for further release.

## Release process for Qiskit

This section contains the human-intervention parts of the release process for pushing a release and hosting it on PyPI.

The technical process of building, testing and deploying the package is automated.
However, the **release manager** should manually follow these steps:

 1. [Check the milestone state](#1-check-the-milestone-state)
 2. [Audit `Changelog:*` labels](#2-audit-changelog-labels)
 3. [Creating, submitting, and merging a PR to handle release-specific changes as last commit on the milestone](#3-submit-a-prepare-xyz-release-pr)
 4. [Tag the commit from step 3 to trigger the release automation process](#4-tag-the-prepare-xyz-release-commit)
 5. [Make post-release changes in the repository](#5-post-release-actions)

The release process is largely the same for all versions.
However, for convenience, let's put names to two main scenarios for a release:

 * a **_first_ release**: If [`stable/x.y` does not exist in upstream repository](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/branches), you are probably preparing for the first release candidate of a major or minor release, and you are in this scenario.

>    Examples of *first* releases are: `0.43.0`, `1.0.0rc1`, and `1.3.0rc1`.

Reviewer: It's minor (pun intended 😄) but I wouldn't use old versions as examples. I would use `v2.0.0` and above whenever possible.

Author: 0.43.0 is an example that, historically, not every first release was `rc1` and might not be in the future. I'm trying to detach the _concept_ from the _implementation_.

 * a **_follow-up_ release**: If [`stable/x.y` exists in the upstream repository](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/branches), this release is some form of follow-up, probably because there is a previous release candidate or you are doing a patch release.
   Examples of *_follow-up_* releases are: `0.43.3`, `1.2.1`, and `1.3.0rc2`.

> [!NOTE]
> This section assumes that the Qiskit-owned GitHub remote is called `upstream` in your git configuration.

### 1. Check the milestone state

Verify that the milestone is in a suitable place to release:

>  - Set the due date for an estimated time for release, if not set already (for example, in patch release cases).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Set the due date for an estimated time for the release, if not set already (for example, in patch release cases).
```

 - All the blocking issues/PR should be merged the day before the release.

>  - You can leave there non-blocking issues/PR until the end of the process.

Reviewer: Do we really want to encourage this?

Author: why not? Non-blocking issues/PR have low priority but still nice-to-have to the milestone. Think about doc fixes, for example.

Author: I tried to clarify it in 7fb82aaa13a8f80509341d77f13bfeb33e4e1368 . Have a look.

Reviewer: Yes, the clarification tamed it a bit.

### 2. Audit `Changelog:*` labels

> > ![NOTE]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
```

> > In this section, `(x.y.z)~1` refers to the **the previous version tag**, since the tool needs to consider changes _since_ the version supplied.

Reviewer: Just a personal taste: I find the `~1` syntax here an overkill and confusing, especially as it's used later in the `generete_changelog.py` examples as if it's a valid synatx for tag arithmetic (is it??). Can we just say "use the previous version tag" and keep the examples for clarification?

Author: It seems like a mistake. It should be `(x.y.z)-1`. Fixing it.
```suggestion
> In this section, `(x.y.z)-1` refers to the **the previous version tag**, since the tool needs to consider changes _since_ the version supplied.
```

> Examples:
> 
>  * For the second release candidate `1.3.0rc2`, `(x.y.z)-1` is previous release candidate `1.3.0rc1`.   
>  * For the first patch release `1.3.1`, `(x.y.z)-1` is the previous stable `1.3.0`.

> >  * For the minor release `1.3.0`, `(x.y.z)-1` is the last release candidate `1.3.0rc2`.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>  * For the minor release `1.3.0`, `(x.y.z)-1` is the last release candidate, e.g. `1.3.0rc2`.   
```

Author: I'm talking about a specific example from the past here. These items are all under the `Examples` part :)

Generate the short-form changelog using [this script](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-bot/blob/master/tools/generate_changelog.py) from [the `qiskit-bot` repository](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-bot):

If this is a **_first_ release** scenario, run `generate_changelog.py` with the following parameters:

```bash

> python generate_changelog.py Qiskit/qiskit (x.y.z)~1 -t $MY_GITHUB_API_TOKEN

Author: ```suggestion
python generate_changelog.py Qiskit/qiskit (x.y.z)-1 -t $MY_GITHUB_API_TOKEN
```

```

The default behavior of `generate_changelog.py` is to check for changes on the `main` branch of `upstream`. If you are doing a **_follow-up_ release**, run `generate_changelog.py` using the existing `'stable/x.y'` branch:

```bash

> python generate_changelog.py Qiskit/qiskit (x.y.z)~1 -b 'stable/x.y' -t $MY_GITHUB_API_TOKEN

Author: ```suggestion
python generate_changelog.py Qiskit/qiskit (x.y.z)-1 -b 'stable/x.y' -t $MY_GITHUB_API_TOKEN
```

See [this section](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md#changelog-generation) for more details about the available `Changelog:` labels. 

### 3. Submit a "Prepare x.y.z release" PR

Create a PR that will serve as the commit we tag for the release and label it with `Changelog:None`.
The PR is like a regular PR in your fork and submitted like the regular PR process.
This step differs depending on the type of release.

Examples for **_first_ release** PRs:

 * [release-candidate PR for Qiskit 1.3.0rc1](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/pull/13397).
 * [release-candidate PR for Qiskit 2.0.0rc1](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/pull/13953)

Examples for **_follow-up_ release** PRs:

 * [patch-release PR for Qiskit 2.0.1](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/pull/14339).
 * [follow-up release-candidate PR for Qiskit 1.3.0rc2](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/pull/13466/).  

#### 3.1 Create the `prepare-x.y.z` branch

> If this is a **_first_ release**, `stable/x.y` does not exist and you should create the branch out of `main`:

Reviewer: Note new method from Jake suggested here: https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/pull/14697. Should we reflect it already here (and make this PR blocked by Jake's)?

Author: good catch. @jakelishman ?

Reviewer: This is inconsistent with Jake's `Package Version` section which was added in #14697. In particular: 
```
qiskit-bot will create a stable/2.2 branch from that commit, since that's the one you should tag.
```

```bash
git checkout -b prepare-x.y.0rc1 upstream/main
```

If you are doing a **_follow-up_ release**, make a PR out of the stable branch:

```bash
git fetch upstream
git checkout -b prepare-x.y.z upstream/stable/x.y
```

In both situations, your active branch now is `prepare-x.y.z`.

#### 3.2 Bump version numbers

Once in the `prepare-x.y.z` branch, bump the package version number to `x.y.z` (e.g. `1.4.2` for a patch, or `1.3.0rc2` for a second release candidate).
The places to update are:

* `qiskit/VERSION.txt`: the only line in the file.
* `docs/conf.py`: the variables `version` and `release`.

> * `Cargo.toml` (only the file in the repository root and none of the other `**/Cargo.toml`s): the variable `version` and run `cargo build`. Cargo doesn't allow 'rc' dev versions. Therefore, for releasing `x.y.0rc1`, the cargo version should be `x.y.0`.

Reviewer: Apparently Cargo supports pre-release version. For that the pre-release part should be added after a dash. So in `*/qiskit/Cargo.toml` the syntax should be `x.y.z-rc1`, e.g. `2.2.0-rc1` (not `2.2.0rc1` as in the other files).

Author: hmm.. you learn something new every day :)

What do you think about this:

```suggestion
* `Cargo.toml` (only the file in the repository root and none of the other `**/Cargo.toml`s): the variable `version` and run `cargo build`. Cargo needs a dash before 'rc' dev versions. Therefore, for releasing `x.y.0rc1`, the cargo version should be `x.y.0-rc1`.
```

> * `crates/cext/cbindgen.toml`: the `QISKIT_VERSION_xxx` macros. Similarly to `Cargo.toml`, 'rc' dev versions are not supported and the integer for the minor should be used. 

Reviewer: Note this PR: https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/pull/14576. Should it be another dependency for this one?

Author: I agree. For now, following https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/pull/14709/files#r2276313602, let's leave it a bit ambiguous and we can go for details later, as #14576 seems like under discussion atm.
```suggestion
* `crates/cext/cbindgen.toml`: the `define QISKIT_VERSION_*` macros. 
```
what do you think?

#### 3.3 Update Rust dependency

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Skip this step if you are doing a **_follow-up_ release**.

Update any Rust dependencies in the `Cargo.lock` file, keeping the MSRV fixed.
Beware that `cargo`'s dependency resolver will not enforce that dependencies satisfy our `rust-version` support, so you should use our MSRV
of `cargo` to do the update and a trial build.
This will happen by default due to our `rust-toolchain.toml` file, but if you need to temporarily override any toolchain changes you have made locally, do:

```bash
rustup install 1.61  # Install MSRV cargo, if required
cargo +1.61 update   # Update lock file
cargo +1.61 build    # Check build
```

#### 3.4 Add a prelude

Add a release note called `prepare-x.y.z` with only a `prelude` section explaining the release.

> > TODO: add more examples

Reviewer: I would put an example from a recent major release (🤔) and another from a recent minor.

Author: included in c0df2bc1c1ca6fd933327f4af25878dc20458918

For patch releases, this can be something like

> Qiskit x.y.z is a small patch release, fixing several bugs found
> in the x.y series.

#### 3.5 Prepare the release notes

In case of **_first_ release**, move all the release notes that are loose in `/releasenotes/notes` into a new folder called `/releasenotes/notes/x.y`.
You do not need to fix typos / code / links in the release notes at this stage.
In the busy pre-RC period, your time is likely better spent coordinating and doing final PR reviews.

However, if this is a **_follow-up_ release** keep the loose files in `/releasenotes/notes` and spend some time looking for typos, broken links, and any broken example code blocks in these files.
It's convenient to [build the docs locally](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md#building-release-notes-locally) and read through the page, trying the links and code blocks.

> 

Reviewer: We should add a step about removing duplicate release notes of bug fixes from a previous release. See this comment for context: https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/pull/14565#pullrequestreview-2938767230.

Author: added in 91d96b539e969312f955fed0bd580727c3cc6412

> #### 3.6 Submit the PR for revision

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 3.6 Submit the PR for review
```

> As a regular PR, commit your changes (don't forget to add the prelude release note), push the branch, and create a PR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As any other regular PR, commit your changes (don't forget to add the prelude release note), push the branch, and create a PR.
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Pay attention to the base: if you are working in a **_follow-up_ release**, the base is `stable/x.y`.
> Only PR against `main` if you are doing a **_first_ release**.
   
Add the PR you just made to the milestone for this release.
This is the last PR that should merge from the milestone.
This PR undergoes the regular review process - use the reviewers to help with checking all the release notes if you need to.

### 4. Tag the "Prepare x.y.z release" commit

> [!WARNING]
> To push the tag that triggers the final deployment of a release, you need to have at least `maintain` permissions on the repository.
> All of the preparation before that can be done by anyone, subject to the standard PR review processes; the `maintain` permission is only required to push a tag to the Qiskit git repository.

Once the PR from the previous section is merged, the release manager tags the commit of that PR.  The tag should have:

> - a tag name exactly equal to the version number

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A tag name exactly equal to the version number
```

> - a tag message that says "Qiskit x.y.z"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A tag message that says "Qiskit x.y.z"
```

> - ideally, [sign your tagging using GPG](https://docs.github.com/authentication/managing-commit-signature-verification/signing-tags)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Ideally, [sign your tagging using GPG](https://docs.github.com/authentication/managing-commit-signature-verification/signing-tags)
```

#### 4.1 Create the tag locally

> Following, the recommended steps for tagging the "Prepare x.y.z release" commit:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following are the recommended steps for tagging the "Prepare x.y.z release" commit:
```

> 1. sync with the Qiskit-owned remote: `git fetch upstream`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Sync with the Qiskit-owned remote: `git fetch upstream`
```

> 2. make sure your commit from previous section is `HEAD` in the stable branch:  `git show upstream/stable/x.y` (in case of **_follow-up_ release**) or `git show upstream/main` (in case of **_first_ release**)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Make sure your commit from previous section is `HEAD` in the stable branch:  `git show upstream/stable/x.y` (in case of **_follow-up_ release**) or `git show upstream/main` (in case of **_first_ release**)
```

> 3. tag with a signature and message : `git tag -s -m "Qiskit x.y.z" x.y.z upstream/stable/x.y` (in case of **_follow-up_ release**) or `git tag -s -m "Qiskit x.y.z" x.y.z upstream/main` (in case of **_first_ release**)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Tag with a signature and message: `git tag -s -m "Qiskit x.y.z" x.y.z upstream/stable/x.y` (in case of **_follow-up_ release**) or `git tag -s -m "Qiskit x.y.z" x.y.z upstream/main` (in case of **_first_ release**)
```

> >![TIP]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>[!TIP]
```

....
-----END PGP SIGNATURE-----

commit ... (tag: <b>x.y.z</b>, upstream/<b>stable/x.y</b>, ...)
Author: ...
Date:   ...

Prepare <b>x.y.z</b> release (#....)
</code>
</pre>

Check that the bold parts are correct.

For example, for the `2.0.3` release:

```bash
git show 2.0.3
```

```text
tag 2.0.3
Tagger: Matthew Treinish <mtreinish@k***r.org>
Date:   Tue Jun 17 08:30:03 2025 -0400

Qiskit 2.0.3
-----BEGIN PGP SIGNATURE-----
....
-----END PGP SIGNATURE-----

commit 19eeb418...14482636a (tag: 2.0.3, upstream/stable/2.0, ...)
Author: Matthew Treinish <mtreinish@k***r.org>
Date:   Tue Jun 17 07:19:06 2025 -0400

Prepare 2.0.3 release (#14626)
```

Note that the tagged commit is precisely the "Prepare 2.0.3 release" commit.

#### 4.3 Push the tag to Qiskit remote

> [!WARNING]
> This step triggers the release.

Push the tag to the Qiskit remote with `git push upstream x.y.z`.
Following the previous example:

```bash
git push upstream 2.0.3
```

At this point, the release-automation process takes over.
[`qiskit-bot`](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-bot) will populate a GitHub release with the new tag and the short-form changelog seen in [step 2](#2.-Verify-`Changelog`-labels).

> If this is a **_first_ release**, `qiskit-bot` will create a new `stable/x.y` branch for this series.

Reviewer: I think this doesn't work currently. 
@mtreinish

Reviewer 2: In general it does work, there is a permissions issue right now where the bot account's token is getting a 403 response when it tries to push the branch. I think I just need to issue a new token and/or check that the bot is in the correct acl group on the repo for pushing branches. I think it's fine to leave this in the doc here and we should just solve the configuration issue.

### 5. Post-release actions

#### 5.1 Announce the release on Slack

Post a message in the relevant Slack channels:

 * IBM internal channels: all the releases.
 * [Qiskit organization](https://qiskit.enterprise.slack.com/)
    - Roadmap announcement `#roadmap-announcements`: Especially release candidates. All other releases (except patch releases) can be posted in the thread of the release candidate announcement.
    - General channel `#general` and Qiskit developer `#qiskit-dev`: All the stable major and minor releases.

> TODO: example/s of the post.

#### 5.2 Update the `main` branch with the next release

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Skip this step if your PR from section Releasing the package - step 3 was to the  `main` branch

Make a PR to the `main` branch that sets the version number to the _next_ minor (e.g. `2.2.0` if you have just released `2.1.0rc1`).
The places to update are:

* `qiskit/VERSION.txt`: the only line in the file.
* `docs/conf.py`: the variables `version` and `release`.
* `Cargo.toml` (only the file in the repository root and none of the other `**/Cargo.toml`s): the variable `version` and run `cargo build`.

> * `crates/cext/cbindgen.toml`: the `QISKIT_VERSION_xxx` macros.

Author: ```suggestion
* `crates/cext/cbindgen.toml`: the `#define QISKIT_VERSION_*` macros.
```

This milestone should be continuously groomed throughout the release cycle. Additionally, at the release manager's discretion, a GitHub project board may be used to help prioritize tasks and monitor overall progress.
During the release cycle, the release manager is responsible for:

- Tracking the status of the remaining issues.

- Determining when issues/PRs need to be pushed to a later release, and which are high priority and the release should block on.
  Discuss with the team; you don't need to make all the decisions, you're just responsible for making sure
  the decisions are made.

- Making sure there are sufficient coders and reviewers assigned to each PR, and checking up on them to make sure they're progressing.

- If this release is a release candidate for a major or minor release, there is a feature freeze starting two weeks before release day.
  No new public-API-changing PRs (new features or deprecations) can be added to the milestone during this period; they must wait until the next minor release.
  If the API-change is not backwards compatible (like a removal), it needs to wait until the next major, following SemVer.

> When we're getting close to release day, **do not** try and race through large and non-blocking PRs.

Reviewer: I would add another item here about making sure that all the PRs/issues opened against the designated release branch are included in the milestone. I've noticed a case that we almost missed some PRs because those PRs were opened against the stable branch but weren't labeled for the upcoming release. 
Practically this can be done by filtering all the opened PRs by the branch they are opened against and making sure all of them are marked for the upcoming milestone.

Author: Not fully sure if I understand it. Something like e38f18354dd1f6821a350078bfb5ad56f4b156bf ?

Reviewer: Yes, looks good

```

At this point, the release-automation process takes over.
[`qiskit-bot`](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-bot) will populate a GitHub release with the new tag and the short-form changelog seen in [step 2](#2.-Verify-`Changelog`-labels).

If this is a **_first_ release**, `qiskit-bot` will create a new `stable/x.y` branch for this series.
The GitHub Actions CD pipelines will build the sdist, and the wheels for all
Python / OS / architecture combinations, and push them to PyPI using the
encrypted credentials in this repository.

#### 4.4 Get approval for pushing to PyPI

The first GitHub Actions CD stage builds the [Tier 1](https://quantum.cloud.ibm.com/docs/en/guides/install-qiskit#operating-system-support) and takes between 1.5 and 2 hours.
Once it finishes, the wheels can be pushed to PyPI by [the deploy workflow](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/blob/main/.github/workflows/wheels.yml).
For that, an active approval by [somebody from the release team](https://github.com/orgs/Qiskit/teams/terra-release), excluding the release manager, needs to be performed.

The approver needs to verify that:

* The tag triggering the CI run matches the correct version.  

> * That version is indeed the one intended for release.  

Author: add "leave a comment" similar to https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/actions/runs/18941542303

Author: done in 852082ff27234326a875595d97bf2712eff9ed7b

You can also use this repo to suggest or contribute brand new content beyond updates to the API reference.

## The release manager role

The processes around tracking that the correct code goes into a release in a timely manner, and releasing the package when it is time is the responsibility of the **release manager**.

Each release is tracked through a milestone that aggregates all associated issues and PRs.
This milestone should be continuously groomed throughout the release cycle. Additionally, at the release manager's discretion, a GitHub project board may be used to help prioritize tasks and monitor overall progress.
During the release cycle, the release manager is responsible for:

- Tracking the status of the remaining issues.

- Determining when issues/PRs need to be pushed to a later release, and which are high priority and the release should block on.
  Discuss with the team; you don't need to make all the decisions, you're just responsible for making sure
  the decisions are made.

- Making sure there are sufficient coders and reviewers assigned to each PR, and checking up on them to make sure they're progressing.

> - If this release is a release candidate for a major or minor release, there is a feature freeze starting two weeks before release day.

Reviewer: As this bullet is phrased, it seems to be out of place since it's about some detailed aspect of the iteration process rather than the general role of the release manager. I think this should be moved to the Check the milestone state section below, what do you say?

Author: Good point. Moved in d2c81524092bef62b42a32872c0615637b47e54b

  No new public-API-changing PRs (new features or deprecations) can be added to the milestone during this period; they must wait until the next minor release.
  If the API-change is not backwards compatible (like a removal), it needs to wait until the next major, following SemVer.

When we're getting close to release day, **do not** try and race through large and non-blocking PRs.
The release cycle for major and minor releases is regular so these can wait, and if it is a bugfix, we are free to make another patch release quickly.
Non-blocking issues with no associated PR within a day of the release
should be pushed for further release.

## Release process for Qiskit

This section contains the human-intervention parts of the release process for pushing a release and hosting it on PyPI.

The technical process of building, testing and deploying the package is automated.
However, the **release manager** should manually follow these steps:

 1. [Check the milestone state](#1-check-the-milestone-state)
 2. [Audit `Changelog:*` labels](#2-audit-changelog-labels)

>  3. [Creating, submitting, and merging a PR to handle release-specific changes as last commit on the milestone](#3-submit-a-prepare-xyz-release-pr)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 3. [Create, submit, and merge a PR to handle release-specific changes as last commit on the milestone](#3-submit-a-prepare-xyz-release-pr)
```

   Examples of *_follow-up_* releases are: `0.43.3`, `1.2.1`, and `1.3.0rc2`.

> [!NOTE]
> This section assumes that the Qiskit-owned GitHub remote is called `upstream` in your git configuration.

### 1. Check the milestone state

Verify that the milestone is in a suitable place to release:

 - Set the due date for an estimated time for the release, if not set already (for example, in patch release cases).
 - Check for missing items in the milestone. For example, [search for open PRs against stable branches](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Aopen+-base%3Amain) and ensure they are labeled with the upcoming release milestone.
 - The day before the release: 
   * all the blocking issues/PR should be merged the day before the release.
   * if it is an rc release, you can leave non-critical bug fixes open, as they could land later, before the final release.
   * non-blocking issues/PR can left open and consider bumping to the next release milestone later. 

### 2. Audit `Changelog:*` labels

> [!NOTE]

> > In this section, `(x.y.z)-1` refers to the **the previous version tag**, since the tool needs to consider changes _since_ the version supplied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> In this section, `(x.y.z)-1` refers to **the previous version tag**, since the tool needs to consider changes _since_ the version supplied.
```

Examples for **_first_ release** PRs:

 * [release-candidate PR for Qiskit 1.3.0rc1](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/pull/13397).
 * [release-candidate PR for Qiskit 2.0.0rc1](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/pull/13953)

Examples for **_follow-up_ release** PRs:

 * [patch-release PR for Qiskit 2.0.1](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/pull/14339).
 * [follow-up release-candidate PR for Qiskit 1.3.0rc2](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/pull/13466/).  

#### 3.1 Create the `prepare-x.y.z` branch

If this is a **_first_ release**, `stable/x.y` does not exist and you should create the branch out of `main`:

```bash
git checkout -b prepare-x.y.0rc1 upstream/main
```

If you are doing a **_follow-up_ release**, make a PR out of the stable branch:

```bash
git fetch upstream
git checkout -b prepare-x.y.z upstream/stable/x.y
```

In both situations, your active branch now is `prepare-x.y.z`.

#### 3.2 Bump version numbers

Once in the `prepare-x.y.z` branch, bump the package version number to `x.y.z` (e.g. `1.4.2` for a patch, or `1.3.0rc2` for a second release candidate).
The places to update are:

* `qiskit/VERSION.txt`: the only line in the file.

> * `docs/conf.py`: the variables `version` and `release`.

Reviewer: No need for this anymore as of #14697

Author: removed in 85b107a582d35804ac9c3d2e66a33ad51f855cc1

Author: actually, it is needed for 2.2.* and 1.4.*... I will add a note about it.

Author: addressed in 635b5488d6c29da496eb06c72b88293fddde2bd6

* `Cargo.toml` (only the file in the repository root and none of the other `**/Cargo.toml`s): the variable `version` and run `cargo build`. Cargo needs a dash before 'rc' dev versions. Therefore, for releasing `x.y.0rc1`, the cargo version should be `x.y.0-rc1`.
* `crates/cext/cbindgen.toml`: the `define QISKIT_VERSION_*` macros. 

> #### 3.3 Update Rust dependency

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 3.3 Update Rust dependencies
```

cargo +1.61 build    # Check build
```

#### 3.4 Add a prelude

Add a release note called `prepare-x.y.z` with only a `prelude` section explaining the release.

The list of features to highlight is usually related to the major themes in the release.
The items in the [Roadmap](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/wiki/Roadmap) can be a good starting point.
The prelude does not usually include code examples or detailed explanations, as it is TL;DR of the rest of the release notes.

Consider the following guidelines:

* For major releases, the format is usually a bullet list of feature highlights, followed by a paragraph or two with the major API breaking changes. [Example of a prelude for the 2.0.0 major release](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/blob/stable/2.0/releasenotes/notes/2.0/prepare-2.0.0-bab067ae93d40bb1.yaml)

* For minor releases, use a bullet list of the major improvements and new features, including any major API deprecations. [Example of a prelude for the 2.1.0 minor release](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/blob/stable/2.1/releasenotes/notes/2.1/prepare-2.1.0-409d24ecbe277062.yaml)

* For patch releases, the prelude can just be something like:

>   > Qiskit x.y.z is a small patch release, fixing several bugs found  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  > Qiskit x.y.z is a small patch release, fixing several bugs found in the x.y series.
```
I would remove the line break here

>   > in the x.y series.

Author: ```suggestion
  > Qiskit x.y.z is a small patch release, fixing several bugs found in the x.y series.
```

#### 3.5 Prepare the release notes

In case of **_first_ release**, move all the release notes that are loose in `/releasenotes/notes` into a new folder called `/releasenotes/notes/x.y`.
You do not need to fix typos / code / links in the release notes at this stage.
In the busy pre-RC period, your time is likely better spent coordinating and doing final PR reviews.

However, if this is a **_follow-up_ release** keep the loose files in `/releasenotes/notes` and spend some time looking for typos, broken links, and any broken example code blocks in these files.
It's convenient to [build the docs locally](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md#building-release-notes-locally) and read through the page, trying the links and code blocks.

> When release a major or minor version, check for  duplicated bugfix entries, i.e. there is a chance bug fixes in `X.Y` were also back-ported to `X.Y-1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When releasing a major or minor version, check for duplicated bugfix entries, i.e. there is a chance that bug fixes in `X.Y` were also back-ported to `X.Y-1`.
```

You can remove them from the release notes of `X.Y`.

> [Here an example](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/pull/14565#pullrequestreview-2938767230) of that situation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Here is an example](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/pull/14565#pullrequestreview-2938767230) of that situation. 
```

> The x.y.z final release is planned for X weeks from now. If you encounter any issues with the release candidate, please [file an issue](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/issues/new/choose) so we can address them before the final release.

For minor releases:
> :qiskit-new: **Qiskit x.y is out!**
>
> * Fully backwards compatible with x.0. As always, following [Semantic Versioning](https://qisk.it/semver)
> * A technical release summary will be published on [the IBM blog](https://www.ibm.com/quantum/blog) in about a week
>
> or
>
> * Here is technical release summary (link to the blog post)
> * Take a look to the release notes (link)
> Don't forget that the Qiskit vX series has bug fixing support until XXth, XXXX and security support until YYth, YYYY.

For patch releases:
> :qiskit-new: **Qiskit x.y.z has been released!**
> This is a minor bugfix release for Qiskit x.y. You can find it on pypi (link) and in our GitHub releases (link).

#### 5.2 Update the `main` branch with the next release

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Skip this step if your PR from section Releasing the package - step 3 was to the  `main` branch

> Make a PR to the `main` branch that sets the version number to the _next_ minor (e.g. `2.2.0` if you have just released `2.1.0rc1`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make a PR to the `main` branch that sets the version number to the _next_ minor (e.g. `2.2.0.dev0` if you have just released `2.1.0rc1`).
```

The places to update are:

* `qiskit/VERSION.txt`: the only line in the file.

> * `docs/conf.py`: the variables `version` and `release`.

Reviewer: No need for this anymore as of #14697

Author: removed in 85b107a582d35804ac9c3d2e66a33ad51f855cc1

* `Cargo.toml` (only the file in the repository root and none of the other `**/Cargo.toml`s): the variable `version` and run `cargo build`.
* `crates/cext/cbindgen.toml`: the `#define QISKIT_VERSION_*` macros.
* `.mergify.yml`: change the `backport` action to target the new stable branch that `qiskit-bot` created as part of the release (see [*Backporting* section](#Backporting) for details on Mergify).

This opens the `main` branch for feature development for the next release.

> Examples for post-release PR:

Reviewer: In general these are not the best examples since they don't follow the version labeling method introduced in #14697. That said, we still need an example here so I suggest we keep just one example and add the caveat that the versions should follow the convention introduced in #14697 and not as in the example.

Author: addressed in c537e183aa071b89cb0069451f45001becca3fb8

Once it finishes, the wheels can be pushed to PyPI by [the deploy workflow](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/blob/main/.github/workflows/wheels.yml).
For that, an active approval by [somebody from the release team](https://github.com/orgs/Qiskit/teams/terra-release), excluding the release manager, needs to be performed.

The approver needs to verify that:

* The tag triggering the CI run matches the correct version.  
* That version is indeed the one intended for release.  

In other words, this step ensures that the tag corresponds to the correct SHA-1 (commit ID) intended to be published as the next release.  

> [!WARNING]  
> Approval is the **point of no return** in the release process.  
> Once the package is live on PyPI, it cannot be rolled back. The only option is to [yank](https://docs.pypi.org/project-management/yanking/) it.  

When approving, leave a comment like:
> I've confirmed that the <x.y.z> tag points to https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/commit/<sha1_commit_id> which is the `HEAD` of the `stable/<x.y+1>` and correctly updates the version numbers.

> Usually, once Tier 1 is live on PyPI, the post-release actions in step 5 can start, including the announcements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Usually, once Tier 1 is live on PyPI, the post-release actions in step 6 can start, including the announcements.
```
